---
title: Medical Ethics in the Emergency Department
date: 2026-01-30
author: "Resident Editor: Philippe Ayres, MD Guest Faculty Editor: James Willis, MD"
categories:
  - Evidence
hero_image: /images/uploads/medical-ethics.png
excerpt: It’s nearly midnight in your busy urban emergency department (ED). As
  the senior resident, you just received sign-out from the day team on eight
  patients in addition to keeping up with new patients. You look on the track
  board and see a new patient with a chief complaint of “chest pain”. It’s a
  70-year-old man and you recognize the name because you’ve personally seen this
  patient no less than five times in the past week and always with the same
  complaint. According to your medical record, he has been seen over 100 times
  in the past three months in various EDs.
---
It’s nearly midnight in your busy urban emergency department (ED). As the senior resident, you just received sign-out from the day team on eight patients in addition to keeping up with new patients. You look on the track board and see a new patient with a chief complaint of “chest pain”. It’s a 70-year-old man and you recognize the name because you’ve personally seen this patient no less than five times in the past week and always with the same complaint. According to your medical record, he has been seen over 100 times in the past three months in various EDs.

You know his medical history - coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, chronic kidney disease, hypertension, diabetes, substance use disorder, and schizophrenia. You know in all likelihood he’s fine medically and probably needs somewhere to sleep. Maybe the charge nurse will offer him a shower and perhaps a few turkey sandwiches. You approach him and he smells like he always does: the detritus of Gotham. Under your breath, you pray the decontamination shower is working.

He’s resting comfortably but you wake him up. “Mr. Thompan, good evening. I’m the doctor that will be taking care of you. What brings you to the ED tonight?” He initially ignores you, hoping you’ll retreat. But you were prepared and brought a turkey sandwich as a bargaining tool. “Mr. Thompan, I brought you a sandwich. Just talk to me real quick and I will let you get some rest.” He perks up enough for you to perform a quick history and physical examination. You determine there is no medical emergency present - there is nothing new or different about this pain compared to the past several years you’ve been seeing him, and his ECG is unchanged from earlier that day. You know he will sleep until morning and hopefully you can discharge him without relying on hospital police to help him find the exit.

You walk away thinking about the interaction and your options for managing this frequent ED visitor. The clinician in you recognizes a chronically ill elderly man who could at any time have THE chest pain, but today is not that day. Today, he is medically stable for discharge. The empath in you recognizes someone from the streets, looked down upon and cast aside by society, someone with no social or family support, someone who despite their unpleasant demeanor, has come to recognize your ED as a safe space with food and shelter.

This is a common scenario in EDs across the country, a classic case most accurately classified as malingering, where a patient fabricates or exaggerates symptoms for material gain. In EDs, malingering is more common among frequent utilizers in psychiatric settings.[\[1]](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34277261/) Having performed the legally required screening exam and determined there is no life or limb-threatening injury present, some ED doctors might discharge the patient back to the streets from whence they came. That would be a perfectly reasonable and defensible approach to dealing with patients who are abusing the healthcare system. The Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA), is a federal law that imposes specific obligations on Medicare-participating hospitals that offer emergency services. EMTALA requires that anyone coming to an emergency department requesting evaluation or treatment of a medical condition, receives a medical screening examination. If they have an emergency medical condition, the hospital must provide stabilizing treatment, regardless of the patient's insurance status or ability to pay.[\[2]](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1305897/) Many ED providers appreciate the EMTALA mandate, which allows them to treat anyone without worrying their actions will bankrupt the patient. However with the ongoing ED boarding crisis, the bed Mr. Thompan is lying in may be put to better use holding a person who is truly ill with a medical emergency. Why should this man be allowed to occupy precious space?

How can an ED doctor determine the right thing to do in this scenario? Is 1 AM too late for an ethics consult? Everyone wants to do the right thing but how do we develop a framework for determining the right action within a myriad of morally fraught encounters?

The ED is a special setting with less time for contemplation than in any other field of medicine. ED physicians have an obligation to provide their services ethically without the input of a hospital ethicist. We rely on fast-thinking and heuristics-based decision-making, neither of which lend themselves to rumination on ethical framework development. If one did have time, they would find that modern medical ethics have been developed from a combination of socially accepted ethical theories, principles, and values, as well as institutional values, all of which are at play in the ED and heavily influence the care we provide.

**I. Ethical Theories**

Ethical theories represent the most general approach to how members of society should act with respect to others. These theories tend to be ephemeral, providing a general guideline for right and wrong. Western medical ethics draw from several ethical theories including Natural Law, Deontology, Utilitarianism, and Virtue theory. Of these, utilitarianism and virtue theory influence healthcare decision-making the most.

 

1. Utilitarianism asks, “How can the best outcome for the most people be achieved?” It is less concerned with the means and more concerned with outcomes, such that they should be net positive. This framework works best when applied to population-level decision-making. The limit to utilitarianism is its lack of subjectivity i.e. in the classic trolley-car dilemma; the values change if the decision-maker has a family member on the trolley track. In this moral dilemma the reader is allowed to choose between the deaths of three vs five people, most would choose to allow three to perish over five. If, however, there is a family member of the decision-maker in the group of three the decision is more complex and it would be difficult to fault someone choosing to allow the five to perish in favor of the group of three with a family member’s life at stake. 
2. Virtue theory is emerging as a more widely accepted ethical theory in modern medicine, especially emergency medicine. It broadly asks “What would a good person do in this situation?” Virtue in this view is not simply performative or prescriptive, it is inherent values deeply entrenched in an adherent’s value system. As an example: a person with the virtue of “honesty” is not simply someone who tells the truth because the truth is required and lies are prohibited. They value honesty such that they choose to surround themselves with honest people, deplore dishonesty, are unsurprised when honesty triumphs and are distressed by dishonesty. These, however, are not perfect virtues and even the most virtuous may fall short on occasion. Current ethical codes for ED physicians include the *1999 Society for Academic Emergency Medicine (SAEM) Ethical Code*, as well as the *2023 American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) Policy Statement: Code of Ethics for Emergency Physicians*.[\[3]](https://www.acep.org/siteassets/new-pdfs/policy-statements/code-of-ethics-for-emergency-physicians.pdf)[[4]](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10530668/) These aspirational guidelines espouse virtue theory and advocate for fostering virtue as moral vaccination against ethical pitfalls inherent in emergency medical practice. The virtues advocated for by ACEP are courage, justice, vigilance, impartiality, trustworthiness, and resilience.

**II. Principles and Values**

Ethical principles are derived from ethical theories and provide a guide for how to apply a given ethical theory. Values are the subjective standards we learn from an early age, typically from generic, cultural, legal, religious or professional codes. Values are concerned with promoting what the actor considers good and minimizing what they consider bad. For example, the principle of autonomy demands that I respect the person’s right of self-determination and the value of honesty means I will fully inform patients before procedures, therapies, etc.

The caveat here is that in a pluralistic society, we are commonly serving patients with different value systems: the Rastafarian with untreated hypertension who expresses an understanding of his disease process and risks, yet declines to take medications, is not going to benefit from me giving amlodipine 10 mg to treat a blood pressure of 186/98 mmHg because it does not comport with his value system, beliefs, or traditions.[\[5]](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8963898/) It is important to understand that ethical values and principles are not universal, and patients come to the ED with their own moral imperatives, norms, and expectations. The competent emergency provider will learn and incorporate these values into their care plan.

In Western medicine, we have espoused four principles of medical ethics that are largely ubiquitous across the spectrum of medical codes of ethics: respect for autonomy, beneficence, non-maleficence, and justice.[\[6]](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32498071/)  

1. Of these principles, respect for autonomy is the strongest and often the most challenging for physicians for several reasons. The strength of this principle is drawn from the humanistic and judicial understanding that a person with capacity to make their own medical decisions must be granted the opportunity to decide for or against the proposed treatment. Violation of this principle constitutes assault and a tort violation.[\[7]](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36827969/) The challenges to physicians are multiple; first, respecting a patient’s autonomy means that the doctor-patient relationship must be collaborative rather than prescriptive. Secondly, physicians must become educators to their patients, removing medical jargon and making complex pathophysiology and therapies understandable for the patient. This can be particularly challenging if the patient population is of low educational attainment, made up of a high proportion of immigrants, non-native English speaking, or from a different culture. Lastly, physicians must accept that patients may choose to do something other than their recommendations. In some patient populations, these challenges are more pronounced than in others, requiring greater effort on the part of the provider to empower patients in their decision-making. It is no surprise that “patient’s circumstances and preferences” is considered one of the three pillars of evidence-based medicine (along with “research” and “clinical judgment”).[\[8]](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29631266/)  
2. Beneficence, or doing good, is perhaps the most superfluous of principles. Most healthcare professionals entered their fields precisely for this reason - to do good for others. The entire practice of medicine revolves around removing suffering and restoring health. Beneficence is essentially inherent in the practice of medicine. The principle of beneficence is extended when a provider renders aid outside of the ED in supererogatory or Good Samaritan actions such as on site of a motor vehicle crash, on airplanes, following a natural disaster, etc. These actions are not required duties, but they comport with the principle and virtue of “doing good.” Despite the seemingly obvious and immutable nature of this principle, patients such as Mr. Thompan who are frequently seen in the ED, who may wreak of waste, may have bed bugs, may behave disrespectfully, these patients test the emergency provider’s commitment to beneficence on a daily basis. 
3. Non-maleficence is the imperative that the physician must not only do no harm; they must prevent harm, as well as remove harmful conditions. It would be incorrect to say that all interactions with the medical industry are innocuous. For example, consider the lessons learned following the Tuskegee Syphilis Study in which poor Black patients were deliberately exposed to syphilis and prevented from accessing curative medicine. Or, consider the more recent Institute of Medicine report, “To Err is Human” that estimated as many as 98,000 patients die of preventable medical errors annually in the US. These are both sobering reminders that we are less than perfect and while perfection remains an unattainable goal, we should do all we can to prevent harm and promote healing above personal or professional aspirations even if the knowledge gained through immediately harmful actions might be beneficial in the long run. 

 

1. Justice, as the final pillar of medical ethics, is challenging to define in a clinical context as it is typically understood as distributive justice or resource allocation, especially in times of scarcity. This designation places it more in the realm of social healthcare policy. In the ED, however, justice can be considered in terms of patient triage, where the more severely ill are prioritized using a combination of utility and strict equity based on the Emergency Severity Index. A patient’s Emergency Severity Index is determined by their chief complaint, general appearance, and their vital signs.[\[9]](https://bmcemergmed.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-227X-11-16)  In layman’s terms an Emergency Severity Index is an estimation of how likely the patient is to die without acute, immediate intervention. Justice demands that this assessment take place without the influence of irrelevant characteristics such as race, ethnicity, creed, gender, nationality, sexual orientation. Justice further demands that the EP utilize resources responsibly. However, it fails to account for factors such as relationship, housing, substance use, mental health, poverty, and other forms of marginalization which are predictors of health outcomes.[\[10]](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29137869/) 

The application of the principle of Justice may be expounded upon to consider societal justice, and the role of the emergency provider when confronted with social injustices affecting their patients’ healthcare outcomes. This is recognised in the ACEP Policy Statement on the EP’s duty to society, especially regarding the health needs of impoverished or marginalized patients.[\[3]](https://www.acep.org/siteassets/new-pdfs/policy-statements/code-of-ethics-for-emergency-physicians.pdf) 

 

 

**III. Institutional Ethics**

Healthcare institutions may also have their own value system based on creational intent, sources of funding, academic affiliation, and services offered. Religiously oriented, non-profit, and safety net hospitals are prime examples of institutions that may place higher priority on the biopsychosocial model of healthcare and incorporate more social services into a patient’s stay. This attentiveness belies not only the values an institution embraces, but the virtues it will look for in its staff.

Safety net hospitals have a special designation based on the proportion of uninsured or underinsured patients they see. These hospitals tend to be teaching hospitals with large inpatient units, located in large metropolitan areas. These institutions serve disproportionately Black and Hispanic patients, living at or below the poverty level, and suffer from increased rates of untreated or undertreated mental health and substance use disorders. Safety net hospitals also serve unhoused people, prisoners, legal and undocumented immigrants at significantly higher rates than non-safety net hospitals. Additionally, these patients are more likely to rely on EDs as episodic primary care centers. The fiscal reality of caring for these patients is that Medicare and Medicaid, insurers most heavily represented in low-income settings, tend to reimburse hospitals significantly less than private insurers, which are more common in affluent areas. This leaves safety net hospitals scrounging for resources and personnel, and shutting down some services, all to the detriment of their highly vulnerable patient population. 

**Conclusion**

In the ED, we face many Mr. Thompans - these are patients who test our patience. A purely principled approach to caring for these patients may fail to grasp the complexities present in this common ED occurrence. The incorporation of a virtue-based ethic serves to buttress decision-making and support ED providers. There are many virtues that define an emergency provider at an urban safety net hospital. Courage, positive regard, charity, and compassion are those which I find most compelling. 

The virtue of courage allows the ED provider to approach and care for a potentially violent patient, a patient with a communicable disease, a malodorous patient, and a patient who maintains an unpleasant demeanor. This does not mean that we should put ourselves in danger, but that we must not evade potentially unpleasant situations or avoid doing what is right for the sake of ease. Courage means showing kindness, gentleness, and support even in the face of unpleasant circumstances.

Next, the virtue of unconditional positive regard, closely aligned with the principle of justice, recognizes that if we are to treat patients with fairness, we must first recognize their worth as human beings. This worth remains despite low social standing, intoxication, illegal actions, and poor demeanor. Charity as a virtue denotes a willingness to go beyond what is required to serve a person in need. It may require self-sacrifice, death to self-interest, or altruism incarnate. Charity is the pinnacle of virtue because at its core, it is about genuine caring and selfless giving. Lastly, the virtue of compassion combines empathy, sympathy, humility, understanding, tact, and gentleness. Compassion can be considered equally as important as technical competence because without compassion the patient will not trust that you have their best interests in mind.

If we apply each of these virtues to our interaction with Mr. Thompan or the multitude of similar patients that test the limits of our virtues, we can begin to develop a framework for how to manage them in the ED. Courage will allow us to approach, knowing that the interaction may be unpleasant. Positive regard allows us to see the patient as deserving the same medical care we would give to anyone else. Charity asks us to consider what additional resources we have at our disposal that may benefit the patient. And compassion compels us to meet the patient where they’re at, with truth and sincerity, providing the best care we can, even if that “best care” is just a bed, blanket, and turkey sandwich. 

Despite the aforementioned one could easily argue that once a medical screening exam has been completed, and it has been determined that there is no immediate medical condition requiring further inpatient treatment, Mr. Thompan should be discharged back to the street. This would be a morally defensible opinion. Based on the principle of beneficence he has been seen and evaluated by a medical professional, if he was hungry he was fed, if he was cold he was clothed, all to the best of our capability as an overused and under-resourced ED. Based on the principle of non-maleficence he is not being discharged in worse or to worse conditions than what he experiences every day; unfortunately some people have sad existences but a longer stay in the emergency department is not going to fix his entire life. Based on respect for autonomy he has chosen not to go to a shelter or other such facility where he has been referred to countless times, he also refuses medications for his many medical conditions. Additionally, the principle of justice, strictly applied in terms of resource allocation, recognizes that occupancy by this non-critical patient limits the number of beds available to patients in the waiting room who have true medical emergencies requiring attention. On a busy ER shift Mr. Thompan would rightly be sent away. 

I would argue that in addition to the feel-good virtues outlined above, there are practical reasons for allowing an undomiciled person to sleep overnight in the ED on a cold night. These outweigh the potential harm caused by discharging them to the street. Allow me to preface this argument by stipulating that this person’s presence must not be disruptive to the emergency department’s functioning. This means they cannot be yelling or getting in fights with the staff or other patients, they cannot smoke cigarettes or other substances in the bathrooms, and they cannot be stealing anything, all of which would rightly cause them to be removed post-haste. 

First, Mr. Thompan is legitimately a sick old man. He has unmanaged medical comorbidities including heart failure, coronary artery disease, diabetes, crack cocaine abuse, schizophrenia, and homelessness, all of which increase his risk for premature death.[\[10]](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29137869/)  As with any geriatric patient, discharging them at 2 A.M. when they couldn’t get into a shelter even if they wanted to, is morally unconscionable and violates one of the central tenets of the EP relationship with society as put forth in ACEP’s Policy Statement (i.e. adequate resources must be available to protect patient interests).[\[3]](https://www.acep.org/siteassets/new-pdfs/policy-statements/code-of-ethics-for-emergency-physicians.pdf)

Second, Mr. Thompan’s method of malingering adds very little to the EP’s cognitive burden. An attending or senior resident familiar with him and his regular presentation will quickly evaluate him and determine there is no immediately life-threatening condition. Mr. Thompan and others like him will often acknowledge they simply have nowhere to go, or they’re just hungry. 

Third, these types of high utilizers have demonstrated on several occasions that if they are discharged from one hospital in the middle of the night they will present at another hospital’s emergency department. If they are not well known to the second ED they may be extensively worked up based on their chief complaint and comorbidities. When average inpatient ACS work up costs are well over $20,000 it seems more fiscally responsible to let the man sleep until morning.[\[11]](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/2794393)  

“Let all who serve here remember that this institution is dedicated to the care of all who are helpless and afflicted. This before all else.” - Unknown 





References



1. Zwick T, Sharp C, Severn D, Simpson SA. Malingering in the Emergency Setting. Cureus. 2021 Jun 15;13(6):e15670. doi: 10.7759/cureus.15670. PMID: 34277261; PMCID: PMC8282263.
2. Zibulewsky J. The Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA): what it is and what it means for physicians. Proc (Bayl Univ Med Cent). 2001 Oct;14(4):339-46. doi: 10.1080/08998280.2001.11927785. PMID: 16369643; PMCID: PMC1305897.
3. American College of Emergency Physicians Policy Statement: Code of Ethics for Emergency Physicians; 2023. 
4. Syverud S. SAEM ethical guidelines for academic emergency physicians who provide medical malpractice consultation. SAEM Ethics Committee. Society for Academic Emergency Medicine. Acad Emerg Med. 1999 Oct;6(10):1066. doi: 10.1111/j.1553-2712.1999.tb01195.x. PMID: 10530668.
5. Brown R, Bateman CJ, Gossell-Williams M. Influence of Jamaican Cultural and Religious Beliefs on Adherence to Pharmacotherapy for Non-Communicable Diseases: A Pharmacovigilance Perspective. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Mar 14;13:858947. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.858947. PMID: 35359857; PMCID: PMC8963898.
6. Varkey B. Principles of Clinical Ethics and Their Application to Practice. Med Princ Pract. 2021;30(1):17-28. doi: 10.1159/000509119. Epub 2020 Jun 4. PMID: 32498071; PMCID: PMC7923912.
7. Hwan Kim, Albert Lee, How patient autonomy drives the legal liabilities of medical practitioners and the practical ways to mitigate and resolve them, Postgraduate Medical Journal, Volume 99, Issue 1168, February 2023, Pages 83–88
8. Szajewska H. Evidence-Based Medicine and Clinical Research: Both Are Needed, Neither Is Perfect. Ann Nutr Metab. 2018;72 Suppl 3:13-23. doi: 10.1159/000487375. Epub 2018 Apr 9. PMID: 29631266.
9. Aacharya, R.P., Gastmans, C. & Denier, Y. Emergency department triage: an ethical analysis. BMC Emerg Med 11, 16 (2011).
10. Aldridge RW, Story A, Hwang SW, Nordentoft M, Luchenski SA, Hartwell G, Tweed EJ, Lewer D, Vittal Katikireddi S, Hayward AC. Morbidity and mortality in homeless individuals, prisoners, sex workers, and individuals with substance use disorders in high-income countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2018 Jan 20;391(10117):241-250. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31869-X. Epub 2017 Nov 12. PMID: 29137869; PMCID: PMC5803132.
11. Oseran AS, Ati S, Feldman WB, Gondi S, Yeh RW, Wadhera RK. Assessment of Prices for Cardiovascular Tests and Procedures at Top-Ranked US Hospitals. JAMA Intern Med. 2022;182(9):996–999. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2022.2602
12. Hursthouse, Rosalind and Glen Pettigrove, "Virtue Ethics", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2023 Edition), Edward N. Zalta & Uri Nodelman (eds.)
13. To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine; 1999.
14. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on the Changing Market, Managed Care, and the Future Viability of Safety Net Providers; Ein Lewin M, Altman S, editors. Americas's Health Care Safety Net: Intact but Endangered. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2000. 2, The Core Safety Net and the Safety Net System. Available from: 
15. Whelehan DF, Conlon KC, Ridgway PF. Medicine and heuristics: cognitive biases and medical decision-making. Ir J Med Sci. 2020 Nov;189(4):1477-1484. doi: 10.1007/s11845-020-02235-1. Epub 2020 May 14. PMID: 32409947.
16. Larkin, G.L., Iserson, K., Kassutto, Z., Freas, G., Delaney, K., Krimm, J., Schmidt, T., Simon, J., Calkins, A. and Adams, J. (2009), Virtue in Emergency Medicine. Academic Emergency Medicine, 16: 51-55. 
17. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Quality of Health Care in America. To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System. Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS, editors. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2000. PMID: 25077248.
